The following is a conversation with Susan Cain.
Author of quiet the power of introverts in the world that can't stop talking and her most recent book Bittersweet how sorrow and longing make us whole.
And now a quick view second mention of a sponsor check them out in the description it's the best way to support this podcast we got brave for browsing.
Skiff for email,
missing the main for style athletic greens for performance and insight tracker for longevity Choose Wisely my friends
and now on to the full ad reads as always no ads in the middle I find those really really really annoying I tried to make this interesting but if you skip them please do check out our sponsors I enjoy their stuff maybe you will too.
The show,
It's About You by Brave a fast privacy-preserving browser that feels like Google Chrome but without ads or the various kinds of tracking that adds can do I love using it more than any other browsers including Chrome I still use.
Firefox age Chrome all those but I use them like one percent of my time my main driver in terms of web browsing is Brave.
It's fast it's just snappier I guess is the right term to use snappier than any other browser I use it's also exciting to me like I feel like I'm supporting innovation in the space.
It's exciting to see that given all the web browser Wars of the past they're still new innovators the that come up,
and dominate and come up with good ideas that really push everybody else to do better so I'm a huge supporter and fan
of Brave browser they by the way have their own search engine called Brave search engine you should use that to I use it I love it get it at Brave.com Lex and it might become your favorite browser to.
The show is also brought to you by skiff a private end-to-end encrypted email also they do collaboration but emails the thing the latest thing that they want to focus on I love it both for document collaboration and for email.
What does end-to-end encryption mean it means that nobody nobody,
no big tech company not skiff themselves have access to your email that means you can email whoever the heck you want and the world can't know about it it's just between you and the person you're emailing.
As our world becomes more and more digital
this is the Battleground for privacy.
Skiff puts emphasis on the privacy in the security and on top of that makes the thing look sexy.
Easy to use like the interface of an email client obviously is essential it can make a break a client and Skip does it extremely well you can get 10 gigabytes of free storage.
And it works on mobile and desktop all that kind of stuff it's easy to migrate from other email Services you can sign up ask if.com Lex.
This show is brought to you by missing a main.
The maker of comfortable stylish dress shirts and other menswear I'm wearing one of their shirts right now in this very hot Austin summer because it feels cool refreshing it feels great against the body just Matt it's.
I'm trying to use words to describe what I'm wearing.
Which is hard to do anyway just feels good and I like how it fits the body I think,
however the science of cloth and all that kind of stuff works it just it feels good it looks good I love it now they have all kinds of styles colorful and so on but as you can imagine I go for the black dress shirt that's what I that's what I love,
that's why I feel good in its lightweight breathable and moisture-wicking.
Lord knows I need that in this Austin summer right now you can get a special discount as a listener.
If you go to missing the main.com and use promo code Lex again I highly recommend their black dress shirt.
This shows also brought to you by athletic greens and the AG one drink which is an all-in-one daily drink to support Better Health and Peak Performance to replace the multivitamin for me.
And went far beyond that was 75 vitamins and minerals it's the first thing I drink every day I drink it twice a day.
It gives me a nutritional basis for all the crazy diet physical and mental Endeavors I undertake.
Sometimes I fast for 24 hours sometimes even longer
sometimes because I want to sometimes because I just lose my mind in a particular task I'm doing and I forget to eat which is a beautiful beautiful thing but if you do that beautiful thing you should make sure your body doesn't
right out of sort of the essential vitamins and minerals it needs that's what I count on athletic greens to do plus is delicious.
It's freaking delicious they'll give you one month supply of fish oil when you sign up at athletic greens.com Lex.
The shows also brought to you by inside tracker a service I use to track biological data there were bunch of plans most include blood tests
why do you need a blood test you ask well that's because the blood contains a lot of data about your body and they use machine learning algorithms to analyze that data,
the blood data DNA data Fitness tracker data all to provide you with customized personalized advice for diet and lifestyle changes this is the future the.
Decisions about your body I think should be based on.
Data from your body not on generic population data let's go to John Mayer and say that Your Body Is a Wonderland let's go with that it's a unique Wonderland and so let style changes.
Should be based on,
data from that unique Wonderland that is your body go to inside tracker.com and for a limited time you get special savings for being a listener of this very podcast.
This Deluxe treatment podcast support it please check out our sponsors in the description and now dear friends here Susan Cain.
Music.
You've written on your website that quote I prefer listening to talking reading to socializing and cozy chats to group settings.
So I think this conversation in the podcast is going to be fun what's a good definition of an introvert is something like those three things a good start.
It is a good start in terms of how introverts experience day-to-day life I think a good definition is one that.
Some of your listeners will have heard many times before you know the idea of where do you get your energy and for some people they get their energy more from,
quieter settings and for other people they get it more from being out there.
So A good rule of thumb is to ask to imagine that you're at a party that you're really enjoying and you've been there for about two hours or so and it's with people you really like.
And it's your favorite place it's all good.
An extrovert in a setting like that is going to feel charged up and they're going to be looking for the after-party and an introvert no matter how good a time they're having and how socially skilled they are.
There's this moment where you just like wish that you could teleport and be back at home.
Yeah and that the time before the start of the party to the time when that moment happens is different for different people so like the shorter that is the more of a niche where you are is that that kind of thing,
the shorter the moment until you get to the place where you got a Teleport oh yeah yeah and then for extroverts it's the opposite right like they're going to feel.
Maybe they're working on I don't know like focused on producing a memo that's really intensely interesting to them but if they're in that state of like solitary.
The solitary mode of really focusing they might get stir-crazy a lot faster than an introvert would and so it doesn't have so much to do with what you're good at as how you get your energy,
and so for an introvert the source of energy is what silence Solitude and for an extrovert its interaction with other people,
what I'd really say is that and this is neurobiological as well is that it has to do with how your nervous system reacts to stimulation so for an introvert,
you're feeling in a great state of equilibrium when there are fewer inputs coming at you.
So they could be social inputs but that's why an introvert in general would rather hang out with one close friend at a time as opposed to you big party full of strangers because.
Too many inputs for the nervous system and for an extrovert the nervous system needs more stimulants so if they're not getting enough they get that listless and sluggish feeling.
So if you're just walking through the world like a people listening to this but in general how do you know if you're an introvert.
Like how do you empirically start to determine if you are in large part and introvert.
I would start by just asking that question of what happens to you you know it around the two-hour Mark where you're having a good time yeah like I mean imagined but I also find curious if you have a different experience from this but from all the years that I've been out there
talking about this topic I found that.
Most people really seem to know once they're being honest with themselves and maybe that's the question to ask is like if you imagine that you have,
a Saturday or a whole weekend where you can spend your time exactly the way you want to with no professional obligations and no social obligations,
who would you spend it with how many people what would you be doing and what is that picture that you're painting start to look like.
Yeah so there's Nuance to this though because I'm sure for extroverts to get energized by.
Stimulation whether a stimulation with other people like it depends what that stimulation is right like maybe you're not surrounded by the kind of people that you enjoy being around so you know.
Um
Maybe that has to do less with whether some characteristics is your personality more has to do with the fact that like what your environment is like that's always kind of
the question do you want to be alone because everybody around you is an ass hole or do you want to be alone because you get energized from being well I would hold the variables constant I guess okay
you know you pass was constant and c and then there's the other thing you kind of observe that there's a lot of people.
They will say they get energized from being alone like.
People are exhausting to them or something like that but at the same time when you see them at a party they seem like the life of the party.
I know and I hear from those people all the time there's so many people like what would you classify them as exactly is It ultimately is the source of energy is the most important thing or like how the heck are they the life of the party.
It's a bunch of different things you know so first of all just to say like a big
caveat to all of this is humans are just amazingly complex so you can't like explain every individual human through these parameters even though I think the parameters are really valuable but that person at the party it could be that,
they're more of an ambivert so they kind of in the middle of the spectrum that's it basically means someone who's not extremely introverted or extremely extroverted they're kind of in the middle so maybe at a party there more extroverted side comes out
or it could be an introvert who's gotten really good at the skills of acting more like a pseudo extrovert and they,
pull that up at the moment that they need it so that learn how to fake it yeah oh there's a lot of people like that and I know this because.
Like I think out of all the people on this planet you could be talking to you I've heard from the most number of those people like they all they all come and tell me about their experience,
out in the world presenting a face that's different from what they feel so one of the things you talk about is.
At least in the west have constructed a picture of success and that picture.
Is usually one of an extrovert like when you imagine somebody who's a leader who's a successful person.
That person has some of the qualities you would associate with an extrovert and so there's a lot of incentive.
For faking it yeah exactly you will if you want to be successful you gotta be able to fake it to sort of.
Hang with the rest of the team you have to have to be able to be outgoing and all those kinds of things and not be drained by the interaction.
Yeah but I mean there are also a lot of introverts who figure out ways to draw on their own strengths and their incredibly.
Connecting and successful and they're great leaders and they're not actually faking it they're more just figuring out ways to do it their own way,
you see a lot of people like that.
Is there advice is there lessons you can draw from that from just observing how you can be an introvert and be in a leadership position.
Yeah it's kind of like a mantra figuring out what your own strengths are and how to draw on them I think of.
A guy I know Doug Conant who had been the CEO of Campbell Soup for many years he's very introverted he's quite shy also by his own just description and.
And he really cares about people and so when he started.
Campbell the employee engagement ratings of the company where all the way at the bottom of the Fortune 500 and by the time he stepped down ten years later they were all the way at the top and.
He was it wasn't that he was going out there and schmoozing people but he really did care so he would find out who are the people who had really been contributing and he would write to them personal letters of thanks.
And,
and people and these letters meant so much to people they would like carry them around with them and during his time the 10 years there he wrote 30,000 of those letters
so like that was his way of doing it that was his way of drawing and his own strength and and you know what like he did that together was of course you sometimes have to go outside your comfort zone no matter who you are so he was doing plenty of that too yeah it's kind of combination,
yeah that the writing process and focusing on the one-on-one interaction,
I can definitely relate there's something deeply draining which concerns me about like Zoom meetings because it's some weird brain manipulation it's a more well because you're not really engaged.
But it wears on you the same way that it does a party it feels like you're emptying that bucket for the introverts,
even though they're not participating at all in the meeting and I suppose that's true for physical meetings to but with zoom meetings remote meetings
it's so much easier to invite a larger number of people into the meeting so you're draining more and more of the introvert energy and I'm probably X42 but the introvert definitely there's I mean it's interesting I I would love to understand that more because there's more and more push towards
remote work.
Without I think a deep understanding of why these meetings are so draining on people I just anecdotally have heard from that but maybe that's because the managers the people who arranged the meetings are just not.
Sufficiently yet aware of the draining nature of them so that they pull into many people this schedule them to regularly so they need to adjust that kind of thing probably I think people are starting to realize but.
I I would say one reason that steam is so draining is because.
You can see your own self presentation the whole time if you choose to and when you go into in person you can't see your kind of freed of thinking about that all those books like an extra cognitive load that your bearing.
The whole time.
Oh yeah like you might want to you know turn off the camera so you can't see yourself but then you feel like well I have the ability to so I probably should be doing it and then that alone is it,
decision that you're making yeah there's probably studies on this now happening either have happened or are happening the effect of seeing your own.
Face on camera because it's reminding you're supposed to be acting a certain way and that's that is especially a stressful thing
yeah you can't be in the moment as much but I mean for you you you make the decision to do all your podcast interviews in person right and so and that's
even when it's very costly if there's any kind of chemistry that contributes at all.
To the conversation which I think most conversations have chemistry even the boring work meanings there's something there because yes you're trying to solve a particular problem with this particular time
but underneath it there's a team building that's happening and honestly.
People also have told me about this why they enjoyed the zoo meetings during,
the pandemic is like they're lonely yeah like they.
You know it's annoying to have to sit and listen to folks talk about nothing and so on but they tune in anyway because it's kind of lonely to sit there by yourself and that.
I mean there's a deep connection there when you're with other people and that is especially true in there you were there in person which is a huge concern for me for like more and more offices.
From a capitalist perspective realizing hey why are we why do we have these large office spaces why do I have to get people together but I think in some in some deep sounds we do but then you also talk about that once we do we want to protect.
The introverts like you don't want the open.
Space which office space which was a big fad for a while I don't know where people stand on that at this point yeah I think people are figuring it out in a post pandemic context but I mean I know what you mean.
So before I became a writer I was a corporate lawyer for like seven years and,
literally the only thing I miss from those years is hanging out with people,
at the office like I don't know just some of the funniest moments I've had in my life came from.
Being at the office until midnight with the other people I was working with so I know exactly what you're talking about so I will say the office is there at that firm and at most firms in those days
everybody had their own office so it was like a dorm room you know it was like a long hallway everybody in their own little dorm room
so you had tons of privacy but you would also come out and hang out with you so you can and I don't go home whenever you want.
Yeah yeah and whenever you roam that means you're kind of open.
You're looking for trouble yeah you're going for direction and the extent to which you would keep your door open you know was It Wide Open or was it half a jar just a little bit,
those are all signals so is there because you said re-energized is there do you like to think and again the human mind is complicated but
do you like to think of it as like a bucket that gets refilled for introverts in terms of energy of,
social interaction that that that the able to handle is do you think of it like that as a bucket that gets empty and needs to be refilled
I think of it yeah more or less because I use the metaphor of a battery that can be recharged or not it's basically the same thing different metaphor but yeah but just to add on that there is a layer of complexity to that because.
You could be somebody who.
Doesn't want the kind of social life let's say where you have to be like on and presenting and interacting with tons of people all the time
but you get really lonely if you were just by yourself you know so what you want is to maybe be in the company of a couple people you know really well,
like for me that pandemic was not actually that hard for me personally I mean I lost family but I mean from the point of view of what we're talking about it wasn't that hard because I live with my husband and my kids so I knew it was hard in the kids and
I felt badly for them but for me I was like you know what I kind of I have a lot of social life right here in the house
you may work yeah that's the cool thing about that but that pandemic I think it'd help people figure out how much they love their family that's true and and allow you give you a chance to really reconnect with kids
was your kids like really spend time with them it's just fascinating to watch people actually it did strengthen the family unit and and often beautiful.
Way which is sucks the mitu to have to leave behind at this point yeah and I think that's part of what people are not going to want to go back to that we need to solve for,
to the extent that work becomes non remote again yeah I think people have just realized how precious those aspects of their lives are and you know for somebody who's in a.
Conventional office job where you're going home and seeing your kids for an hour before bedtime and that's your interaction with them that's.
That's kind of a ridiculous way to set things up it's cool to you can get I think a lot of places give you the option now which is interesting you get to optimize that element of your life you take the commute in the office working on the social interaction there or do you focus on the work at home,
it's also lonely at home but then you get to see your kids if you have kids,
that's part of the optimization is like I have some options now and I'm going to try to optimize.
Solitude loneliness happiness productivity seeing family
seeing co-workers the chemistry with the team building with the co-workers versus just the the raw exchange of information with the co-workers it's fascinating to see how that how that kind of revolves yeah and then there's the big
the third space,
idea of you know the spaces where you're in a co-working space or a cafe or something like that you've got other people around you but you're not exactly interacting with them but they're very much there and that's huge too
we and I don't think we think about that enough yeah that energy is there.
Yeah I lived in Manhattan for 17 years before we had kids and I absolutely loved it like I loved it the feeling of all that energy all around you but you could be anonymous within it.
It's me was perfect he has beautiful the guy I worked this morning for a few hours programmed for a few hours at a Starbucks and first of all.
Like wearing wearing suits like Manhattan is the one place you can kind of fit into that because everyone's wearing suits even looked every day,
well these days unfortunate because I get recognized I wear usually not suits when I just on my own life but yeah I love it I love the way it feels I don't know
and the way I think about the world are aware so I take it seriously as if my life is going to end today like this is what I would want to wear
not for not physical appearance but just it for some reason makes me feel like focused I don't know so even if you're not going to see anyone you would still put the suit on when you're doing your work especially that really
especially then yeah.
Yeah I really I'd ever really loved doing that they're like tells you seriousness of purpose something like yeah like everything makes me do now I don't know what it is I don't know what I imagine exactly but if some kind of.
Platonic form of like a mixture of James Bond and like.
I don't know who else Richard Fineman can I think about when I think about it suit you know I think of Leonard Cohen but you've always wearing skirts too but you know
Leonard Cohen is definitely one of my as a tragic human is a beautiful human being yeah there is words through his own private life yes I definitely would think about Leonard Cohen so.
Small talk that's another thing,
is that part of the equation of introvert versus extrovert well how much people enjoy small talk I kind of went into this whole thing thinking that it was.
From what I've seen most people have studies that most people don't like small talk,
I think that's why people like your podcasts because you're like I got the small talk I'm going deep into it from the very beginning yes it's actually the picture your painting is like the way you started like with your with the book quiet.
And the way you are today is you realize the picture may be more complicated.
Yeah everything is more complicated I will say with the small talk thing that.
I'm curious if you have this experience but I find it fantastic to have a career where
I'm known for anti small talk.
Kinds of topics because it means that anywhere I go like if I show up at a conference or something like that no one does small talk with me they're like telling me about
the Deep truth of their lives from the first hello and I love that and in normal life you have to Wade through a lot before you know if people are ready to go there,
yeah you have that experience to know definitely definitely would people that know me for sure but you forgot how many people feel like they know you.
Because of your podcast that's what noise that counts but he's Fair podcast and I feel it like before I ever became friends with Joe Rogan.
I felt like I was friends with him because I was a fan of his podcast so like it was.
I feel like it's a friendship I know it's a one-way friendship with all the people I listen to and podcasts and even people who are no longer with us like writers,
I feel like I have a relationship with them maybe I'm insane no I totally feel that way that's the whole reason I became a writer like I'm friends with Leonard Cohen yeah,
and he's not aware of it no I can't but I think that's the whole reason for writing or making music or whatever people do,
it's be able to have those kinds of connections that don't require having to be in a room together because there's only so many people you can be in a room with the in your lifetime.
The hard thing is is unfortunately because I value human connection so much.
And I only have just like you mentioned sort of small circle of people I'm really close with.
By design it always hurts me a lot to say goodbye to people hmm I can't uni people you can tell they're beautiful people they're amazing there's something so fascinating about them there are.
They've had a complicated life that he could see in their eyes and the way they tell their story just a few sentences they've gone through some shit but they're also.
Found some elements of beauty and then you get the realize okay well there's a fascinating human here and all you get to say is a few words here and there like a.
Funny little joke maybe a dark joke here and there and then you just say goodbye maybe hug it out.
And you go on your way so like that's a hello and a goodbye you paths will never cross again and that makes me like a sad walk,
fuck away but I guess I wouldn't have it any other way I suppose is the reality is in your book you talk about that sorrow that's sadness not being such a bad thing yeah and when you just said that.
I just thought of this one moment in my life that I haven't thought of for 20-30 years or something but it was when I was in law school and.
And a classmate of mine had his friend come to visit for the weekend and the three of us hung out a lot and we just had you know like an amazing time and,
and then this other guy who wasn't going to be coming back anytime soon if at all sent a postcard to me,
and the only thing written on the postcard was this quote from Oscar Wilde and I don't remember the exact words but it basically said that there's no pain as intense as.
The sorrow of parting from someone to whom you've just been introduced yeah there's something so intense about that and so true.
I think partly also because when you've just been introduced to somebody you don't yet know.
Their difficulties so you're seeing you're seeing the most sparkling version of them you're seeing like a platonic
version of love and friendship and your imagination fills in the rest and some some beautiful way that matches perfectly the kind of thing you're interested in is how I feel about one scoop like one.
Spoonful of ice cream and that's why you always finish the whole tub and you regret all of it you do you do say what did you write this.
I think this is on your website that one of the best things in the world is that Sublime moment when a writer artist or musician
manages to express something you've always felt but never articulated or at least never quite so beautifully so that's the Squall line is one line like that but just a line
from a song.
Or maybe a piece of art that just grabs user something that jumps out into memory like that for you I don't know if I have an exact line though,
I mean that feeling that you just quoted happens to me all the time I'm just bad at recalling exact instances that on the spot but the writer a lendable tongue regularly makes me feel that way,
he's just this beautiful essayist and like Observer of human nature and he's just constantly expressing things and this gorgeous way.
That you've experienced yourself and you feel like.
It's just this Grand Act of generosity you know you feel less lonely feel a deep sense of communion it's such an elevating experience even when it's like a Melancholy line.
Maybe especially when it is it what is that there's a.
So the Jack Kerouac on the road definitely makes me feel that way like every other line in their forlorn Rags of growing old you know I never read that book so what was it about that book that made you feel that way.
Well okay well since you asked I didn't tell you I'm going to linger on this.
So this is story is he's kind of the book The the kind of defining book of the of the beets be generation and.
Basically story of a writer who takes a road trip across the United States a couple of times,
and experiences a few close friends and a few strangers along the way and there's a lot of just those Melancholy goodbyes along the way
you meet all these people with interesting lives some of them are defined by struggle some of them are defined by drugs drinking women all that kind of stuff and still he just kind of
dances around all of that and it's defined by the goodbyes and the passing of time so a lot of the really powerful lines are basically like,
there's that one on there again I don't remember exactly but he meets.
A beautiful girl at a restaurant and the girl.
Is getting or woman's getting on a different bus than he's getting on and so it's that like.
Feeling of falling in love for like.
A second and realizing that like fate is just ripping that out we just similar to this idea of it sucks to say goodbye just when you met but it's especially true when you fall in love just a little bit with a stranger with the.
With the all the possibilities that could lay there so there's a few lines of.
Went down just because I went on this whole Rabbit Hole of thinking one of the lines that grabbed me.
A couple of miles from on the road so one is what is that feeling when you're driving away from people and they recede on the plane till you see the respects dispersing,
it's the two huge World vaulting us and it's goodbye but we lean forward to the next crazy Venture beneath the skies so this is him talking about leaving a particular City the spoiler alert towards the end of the book,
rather the end of the book line ever turned too often
it's more poetry but it's a feeling that captures the book I would say,
the evening star must be drooping and shedding her sparkler dims on the Prairie which is just before the coming of complete night that blesses the Earth darkens all the rivers.
Cups the Peaks and folds the final show Aaron and nobody nobody knows what's going to happen to anybody besides the forlorn Rags of growing old.
And it just captures this kind of in the moment appreciation of the beauty of the world.
And a sadness over the fact that time passes and you leave the people you love behind you leave the places you love behind or at least the way they were,
at the time that you really enjoyed them and you just leave that all that just just the sadness you feel when you read something about it like look at her picture look into your kids grow up
looking at Old Friends getting old something makes you realize.
Time passes and somewhere deep in there is probably a realization of your mortality and then you just makes you somehow for sad that everything.
Comes to an end and then.
That's immediately followed by sort of an appreciation of the Moment Like A gratitude that you get to experience this moment yeah I know it exactly I mean that's that's the whole reason that I wrote bittersweet.
It's all about that so I know intensely what you're talking about and
by the way my husband loves the book A moveable Feast by Ernest Hemingway which I also haven't read but it talks about that same thing you know groups of
people traveling around together and the group coalesces into some magical formation and then one person leaves the group and,
it's never going to be the same again and then they move on to the next one yeah I mean,
I think that's the deepest essence of human nature.
The feeling of longing for some kind of state of perfect complete completeness completion perfect love the Garden of Eden all of it and the feeling that.
You're never going to quite attain it but you get glimpses of it here and there and that
there's glimpses or some of the best things that ever happened to us and there's a fused with sadness because they're not the real thing or they're not the full thing they're just a glimpse there's a it's a glimpse of what we long for so the sadness
that we might feel.
Is always connected to the ways in which we fall short from the perfect thing that were like there's always the thing you're longing for.
And the sadness has to do with the getting a glimpse of it but not quite getting a hold of it.
Yeah it's always always losing its always losing but it's also always that but it's not that sounds really depressing but it's.
It's not you know it's not pressing because you experience this all the time it's also.
Those are the most beautiful moments I think life offers I mean it's intense intense Beauty in those moments because it's getting closer to the real thing that we long for so what about.
Mike loss losing love.
Is that also a beautiful thing well the moment you're talking about,
I think it's easier to appreciate the beauty of it all in the moment because you're experiencing,
you're kind of experiencing the loss and the love all at the same time whereas if you're talking about straight up loss like a betrayal or a bereavement or whatever it is that's.
It's different it's quite overwhelming so losing loved one kind of thing losing a loved one I mean I will say that.
The truth that I think that we can come to after a lot of time on this Earth is the idea that.
Love exists not only in its particular forms so not only in the form of the one person.
You know that one person we love or that other person we love.
Love itself is a state that we have access to and so over time the loss of person a can heal and you can tap into.
Bigger River of Love yeah I mean I had this system comes from Louie Louie c.k. in a show damn I love that line I mean there's a he's talks to an older gentleman.
And Louise is all like sad about.
Losing a loved one or like getting rejected essentially like a breakup hmm and then the the older gentleman.
Give them advice saying like basically criticizes Louis for saying why are you moping around because this is the most this is the best part.
Like losing love is the best part because it that's the real loss is when you forget.
Like feeling shitty about having gone through a breakup.
Is when you most intensely appreciate what that person meant to you mmm thank you most intensely feel loving someone.
Strange Way by realizing that you've lost it by missing it wishing at this moment I wish I had that like that feeling.
That that's when you feel that love the most the absence of it so the the older gentleman gives advice that that that's the best part and it can if you're good with it it can last for the longest.
It could be the most sort of.
Prolonged the experience of deep appreciation and emotion and so on so that that's kind of that's a nice way to look at Los.
Which is a reminder of how much somebody meant to us yeah I mean I think there's a lot of Truth in that because.
Yeah you wouldn't care so much if it weren't something that mattered to you so it's always a signpost to the direction you really want to go to and that's always what it is yeah it's interesting to see the way the,
the mystical versions of.
Many of the Great religions all point in this direction you know whether you were looking at Sufism or or the Kabbalah or in Christian mysticism you see this idea that.
The longing for what you lack,
is the very thing that gives you what you're longing for so the longing is the cure I mean that's that's the way the Sufi poet Rumi puts it the longing is the cure you know and he says be thirsty like be as thirsty as you possibly can.
That's what you want to be the good stuff is the one thing that the having,
yeah yeah of course thoughts a person I just broke up and they'll be like shut up asshole devices sucks I wish I had her him back yeah I know absolutely.
Those are the kinds of life lessons that only work when you kind of step away for a while they don't work in the moment in the moment of excruciation there is something about the fact of.
Knowing that all humans are in that experience together that is also incredibly uplifting.
Well that takes time for people to realize like you know like heartbreak.
In your early teenage years or something like that could feel like this is the completely the most novel yes in the most dramatic.
Pain that any human has ever felt right or maybe even when you're younger and then one of the process one of the things you realize is that everybody goes through this
they can be an Awakening to the fact that we're all in this together
this Human Condition is not just a personal experience the experience who all share and that's that's the kind of love the unity of it
yeah you can get to experience really deep kind of love and I feel like you know where we are prevented from perceiving that love as.
It's actually like the most obvious kind of love and it's right there and it happens all the time but were prevented from perceiving it because we're not really supposed to
talk about things like that it's like there's something unseemly about it well it's also in the west is this of individualist society so like
there's a pressure to sort of see the individual as a distinct Sovereign entity.
That experience is things is that the unity between people is not it's not obviously sort of communicated or talked about or is part of the culture.
Yeah it's not part of the culture and yet you know you see it in our behaviors because we're humans so you know why do people listen to sad music I mean one reason is,
they're hearing expressed for them like the musician is basically saying to them this thing that,
you have experienced I've experienced it to still have lots of other people and but they're saying it all without words and it's,
transformed into something beautiful and there's something about that that's just incredibly elevating I people don't know it but.
Okay there's one study that I have in Bittersweet the found that
people whose favorite songs are there happy songs play it on their playlist about 175 times the people who love sad music play them about 800 times and they say that they feel connected to the sublime when
when they're listening to that music what do you think that is so what is that what what is it in music that connects us to the sublime through sadness.
I mean I have a bunch of different theories like the whole reason I started.
Writing this book is because I kept having this reaction reliably to sad music and,
I realized that for people who I knew who were religious Believers the way they describe their experience of God was what I was experiencing when I would hear that music.
Like all the time it happens over and over again so you wonder what that is and yeah so I started wondering what that is and lots of people have tried to figure out you know what that's all about,
and there are different theories that it's expressing it's like a kind of catharsis for our difficult emotions that it's as we were saying expensive
being in it together
we don't react in that sort of uplifted way,
when you just see like a slideshow of sad faces which is something researchers have actually tested no one really cares when there seems like the sad faces,
but the sad music they're really reacting and also they don't really react when they're hearing music expressing other negative emotions like martial music or something like that it's just the sad music that gives people with elevated sense of wonder.
So I think it's the combination of the sadness and the beauty and I think it's just tapping into.
The essence of the human source code which is a kind of spiritual longing whether we're atheists are believers there's this feeling of longing for
a state and a place of perfect love and perfect unity and perfect truth and all of it and I like an acute awareness that we're not there in this world and you know in religions we express that through the longing for Mecca or Eden or Zion.
And artistically express it with.
Darcy longing for somewhere over the rainbow or you know Harry Potter enters the story at the precise moment that he's become an orphan so he's now going to spend the rest of his life longing for these parents who he can never remember
and that's,
there's something about that state that's at our very core and I think that's why we love it so much well it could be you know you can have the Ernest Becker theory of denial of death where
at the core of that the warm of the core as young said is the fear of death so we're the longing for the perfect thing is has to do with
sort of becoming Immortal as reaching.
Beyond the the absurdity the cruelty of life that all things come to an end for.
Front for no particularly good reason whatsoever when we can rationally explain I know you know I wonder about that all the time like.
I know obviously there's that idea from Becker and throughout philosophy and the tale of Gilgamesh about the idea that the thing we're longing for most of all is immortality but.
I feel like it's not only that I think it's.
More so are also let's say a longing for the Lions to lay down with the Lambs finally you know for like the,
the fundamental calculus of the universe to just be different where life doesn't have to eat life in order to survive and yeah just a completely different situation I want that that.
Immortality would not solve I wonder that could be a very kind of.
Modern thing because surely so much of human history is defined by violence and glorified violence that doesn't give inklings of this Lions and the Lambs so much.
We have women I mean I know all the other stuff is in the Bible to you there's other stuff in the Bible and the Bible is this that particular aspect doesn't necessarily revealed the fundamental motivation of human nature that could be deeper stuff
you know but yeah that is a beautiful that is a beautiful picture but.
Is it just about humans there's it all about but all of life and you have to think about.
What is the perfect world look like it's not just the lines in the Lambs laying together,
is you know how many lines is how many Labs right and you know what having just
had a few very technical conversation about marxian economics versus Kenzie and economics versus neoclassical economics what is the economic and the government system look like for the Lions and the labs that we're longing for so that then you start to build Society on top of all those things and you but you still you return to this what it what is it what are we longing for
what's the role of love in that what's the role of,
that's sad Melancholy feeling the feeling of loneliness is the feeling of loneliness fundamental to The Human Condition like.
We are always striving to sort of channel that feeling of loneliness.
To connect with others like we want that feeling of aloneness otherwise we wouldn't be connecting is that fundamental that feeling like.
You're alone in this even when you're with other people so it alone together you're born alone you die alone maybe loneliness is fundamental I think the longing for Union is fundamental it's just that it looks so different for different people you know
yeah I'm coming back to where we were what we were talking about at the beginning you know.
Union looks incredibly social for a lot of people and hardly social at all for others but everybody needs some version of Union.
Yeah people have been telling me recently about polyamory and all those kinds of things some having probably grown up in a certain part of the world I'm very I got,
very monogamy Centric none of judgmental wages for me what makes me happy is one person for though for my whole life basically just dedication,
yeah because I've just seen through relationships with people and objects in my life.
The longer we stay together the deeper the tie mmm so.
That's just a empirical thing and yes that probably is a personalized thing that's just true for me it could be very different for others maybe it's connected to the introverted thing maybe not.
Who knows that before before I leave because you mentioned songs sad songs what what are we talking about what's a good what what song do you remember last crying.
Oh gosh well I mean that's you know I thought I literally dedicated.
My book to Leonard Cohen he's played such a huge role in my life like I love him I love him and I loved him with his crazy love that I've never been able to understand for decades,
I think I understand a little better now but so you guys so you're better friends with him than me I'm just so does it make you is it the musician or the human to because the human is a is a tortured soul in a way
I'd say it's the musician it's a musician I actually was thinking about this the other day I mean obviously he's not alive anymore but.
I was kind of running the thought experiment you know if you were alive still and I had the chance to meet him in person would I want to do that and I'm not really sure that I would because.
He represents for me symbolically everything.
Well everything else and the sentence right there and so and I think that's okay and I think people can,
can express something through their art that they might or might not express if you were just like hanging out with them and having a coffee.
Like a focus of remembering of like a deep focus of connection that's why when I interact with folks.
It's so draining for me because I'm putting all my whatever weapons I got in terms of like deeply.
Try to understand the person in front of me and doing that dance of human interaction the the humor the intense kind of delving into who they are so it which requires like me.
Navigating around like small talk type of stuff and
and just like compliments and so on in general it could be people depending on the culture depending on the place they'll sometimes
flower stuff was smiling and like compliments like oh yeah I love you this is great but the like this that's all great but you want to get to the core of like
what are the demons in the closet let's talk about it you know and that could be exhausting,
they can be really exhausting so from a letter code perspective you get more and more famous it can be hard sometimes because he probably also an introvert.
Yeah I know he was an introvert because he actually tweeted about my book when it came out so that was a precious moment for me something about we should all be listening to the quiet I can't remember exactly what he said but yeah yeah no he definitely was.
He struggled with depression which I wonder if that's something that's also connected to introversion
but perhaps not actually perhaps that they're very disjoint and and also connected to sensitivity and many sensitive people are introverts so it's kind of like a Venn diagram
about 80% of highly sensitive people are introverted but then some are extroverts and then not all introverts are sensitive
so it's complicated but he was definitely a sensitive type well there's on top of that you see like.
The percent of artist relative to the average of suffer from depression so creative people oh yes very high very very crazy yeah and then the number of artists and successful artists who were orphaned,
when they were young who lost one parent or both parents like an astronomical number I have it in the book and remember the percentage but huge,
and he was one of them he lost his father when he was 9 and his First Act of poetry was.
Was he took his father made suits that's why I thought of him when we were talking about you and and he took one of his father's bowties and wrote a poem.
In his honor and buried the poem and the bow tie in the back yard and that was like his first creative act.
You know that song Chelsea Hotel number to sure where he met I guess it's about Janis Joplin yeah.
What a fun intense,
and cruel person she is so I guess have you ever seen I'm sorry to interrupt you but have you ever seen his son Adam cone and Lana Del Rey perform that song together oh no incredible I have to send it to you
yeah so that for people who don't know I don't,
I mean maybe I don't know it goes I remember you well on the Chelsea Hotel you're talking so brave and so sweet giving me head,
on the unmade bed while The Limousines weighed in the street that's a good line in there about about being ugly
yeah we are ugly but we have the music no before that from a guy's perspective it was oh you told me again you preferred handsome man but for me you would make an exception yeah
so good will she continue that thread in later because I think he said that he was lousy in bed.
I was that right yeah she publicly said that which is like man this they're just.
Okay for people don't know I think this is a true story about them interacting and and being together for a very brief time I don't know dating but just connecting falling in love or.
In this only in this very particular way that I think famous musicians poets Can-Can which is like it's impossible for that kind of thing to last but they they did for brief.
Moment is like a sadness to it because it's so momentarily but it's so epic yeah these
two paths Crossing you just look at the we know these famous people and it's really interesting to watch yeah you don't even have the impression that they're thinking it's going to last
they more know that it's like a blaze of an intersection yeah and the The Limousines already waiting while they're in the moment in the middle of it and then it's done
yeah and he talked about how his music.
He said he said something like some people are more inclined to say hello with her music but I'm rather more valedictory that's what he said what is Valedictorian saying goodbye like this valedictorians address.
Interesting.
You know it's so many of his songs really are about some form of parting or goodbye or an imperfection or something or like the Broken Hallelujah yeah that's the thing that's so.
Incredible about him.
Is the
is the way that he's taking all of that and pointing it in the direction of transcendence like it's not.
It's not just pure sadness its sadness and beauty and that's the thing yeah there is a feeling of transcendence and a lot of the songs.
It's like sadness and Transcendence he writes a goodbye.
But you're moving on to some bigger thing but in a sort of ethereal way like not like a proud arrogant way.
Yeah so his favorite poet was a Garcia Lorca he actually named his daughter after him his daughter's name is Lorca and.
And he talked about how
there's some poem that Lorca had written that made him realize that.
The universe itself was aching but the ache was okay because that's the way you embrace the Sun and the Moon
I mean that's what I think is.
That's why I think there's this whole Rich vein in this.
Bittersweet tradition that he embodies that's like the essence of beauty you know it's the way you embrace the Sun and the Moon
the song Hallelujah return to that often.
Have been me to play it I've now friend who wants to sing it with me this thing ER.
Hmm what is when somebody says they're a singer do they have to be good
because then no but I would say yes I was in a band for a while I sang for a while I was always bad but I enjoy it.
I enjoy I enjoy lyrics I enjoy words yeah one sung or spoken they capture something they could get in that moment
Tom Waits is a huge favorite of mine for that reason
although he often his lyrics are often not that not that simple I'd rather have a bottle in front of me than a frontal lobotomy he's always playing with just like,
these weird word play that's especially in the English language just,
trickier to do I'm fortunate enough to know another language which is Russian so I get to understand the certain languages allow for more world,
wordplay that others English for that reason I don't think has a like.
Like a like a culture of you know what I mean to push back on what I'm about to say but there was no.
Culture of word play until hip-hop came along hmm so like like distorting words in interesting ways for there to be a rhythm rhyme,
and the same time you capturing some really powerful message plus humor,
all that makes that actually hip hop does it does a really good job of this but there wasn't a tradition if you look at poetry in the 20th century that wasn't really a tradition of that in the United States but there was in other parts of the world and certainly in Russia
interesting empowered also not just by Language by the fact that you go through a World War where tens of millions of people died something about Mass
Mass death of civilians that inspires great literature and music and art,
yeah absolutely because you start telling the real truth I think yes this is there's no more reason for small talk that's funny I always have thought that.
If I could choose any other medium besides writing it would be singing
but then the singer no I mean like I'm really not I just love the idea of it but then I also think you know fundamentally a shy person so I think it's much better that my medium is writing instead of singing so like it all worked out,
that said you also an exceptionally good public speaker and you're not supposed to be
mathematically speaking mathematically speaking you're not supposed to be a good public speaker Oh you mean because of shyness or yeah because the shine is because of introversion because of all those kinds of things oh yeah but lots of introverts are public speakers actually
like this is one of I knew this from the studies but then also when I started going out on the lecture circuit
I realized that all my fellow speakers at all these conferences I was going through there all introverts because you know they're all people who like spent years.
Figuring out some idea and now they're out there talking about it though they're in their head figuring out the idea yeah how do you explain how do you explain that the the public speakers would you say the good public speakers are usually introverts,
no I think there's just different styles of it and I think that we just have,
when we hear the word public speaker we have a really limited idea of who that person would be,
for me I like I used to be very phobic about public speaking and part of the reason for it was because I thought that being the kind of person I was.
Didn't equal being able to be a good public speaker because you're only imagining you know like the super kind of out there Showman.
But I think there's another style of public speaking that's more reflective and
thoughtful and conveying ideas and people like that too is there advice you can give on how to overcome that like if you're a shy person to be a public speaker I can totally give that advice because
I used to before I would give speeches you know if I had to do it in law school if I knew like today was the day when I was going to get called on in a law school class,
I literally went I'm vomited on my way to class like that bound her wrists I used to be and.
Yeah the way to do it is through desensitization you know it's like been figured out it's the way to overcome any fear you have to expose yourself to the thing you fear.
But in very small doses.
So you can't start by giving the Ted Talk you have to start II started by going to this class for people with public speaking anxiety where the first day all we had to do is stand up and say our name,
and the down I like that's the victory.
That's fun to watch all those people exactly T just okay that's the first step in the step one step at a time yeah and then like with this class you go back the next week and,
and he would have us come to the front of the room and stand up with other people standing next to us yeah so that
you didn't have the feeling of being all alone in the spotlight through others sharing it with you and you would answer some questions about where'd you grow up you know where do you go to school
and you declare Victory and you're done and then little by little by little you keep ratcheting up the exercises until you get to the point where you can do it
and then you start having successes and you realize oh you know actually I can do this
what about like writing versus improvising because I knew a few people
the colleagues of mine that were working on TED talks and feels like.
You're supposed to like right the thing like way ahead of time and you practice it and they can help you and all that kind of stuff I don't think I've ever
practice the speech once in my life or a lecture or any of that like I know it's really good to do but is what do you find,
that release some of the anxiety preparing well or are you not able to do not preparing well at all I definitely like to prepare.
Before but the kind of preparation that I've done for my TED Talks is completely different from what I've done for everything else because TED Talks are more like a theatrical event where it's like a one-person show and of course if you were
I'm going to go and Broadway with a monologue you would know every word so it's kind of like that
and so I would rehearse it over and over the way you do that isn't that more anxiety knowing every single word it's so much anxiety because yeah your
you're not even so freaked out about being on stage so much as what if I forget something yeah yeah absolutely I mean if they do things like the last Ted Talk I gave,
I actually did forget something halfway through like I just couldn't remember the next line and so I had to walk over like over there where my notes yeah and.
So I did that and the audience like very kindly clapped well I did that and then I came back to the spotlight and kept going and they edit that out no your dad there's a failure modes it's okay it seems really
it seems really stressful like I'm now I'm not sure if I'll ever publish it but.
I've been most is for personal Journey but I've been working on.
A series on wait for it Hitler in the Third Reich so of looking at the historical context of everything because of my family was so much affected by that whole part of History so for me to rigorously I've read a lot about Stalin and Hitler and for me too
Force must one of the best ways to force yourself to really consider material it's a have to,
talk about it totally yeah so that's why I'm doing it but I'm playing with ideas of.
Some of it may be like twenty percent is written down on paper.
But the rest of it is my thoughts in the moment that's a difficult balance.
The strike is the if you write a lot you're going to be more precise you going to be more accurate.
But you're going to miss some of the deep like honest emotion the silence is won't be.
Correct or the silences between the words won't capture.
The depth of feeling unless if you're somebody like me if you're like I Guess That's What actors and actresses have to do like.
Basically even though the script is fully written you improvise between the word between the lines yeah that's a skill well it also takes so much time I mean I experienced that with the TED Talks it's like,
you get your stage so you're memorizing everything word-for-word and at first in that process
it comes out in a really wooden way the way you're saying like the emotions gone but once you really know it so you've internalized the words then all the emotion comes back and you can stay them in a completely different way
you know when you're really speaking it from the heart but you have to know it so well before you can do that most of I would never recommend it because it's just like it's so time-consuming
it's an inch well it in your case it works out beautiful like when it when it all comes together it is a theatrical thing it's like a musical or whatever.
I'm going to think I'm going to come out with a one-man show on Broadway singing now I'm inspired for Real where are you going
where are you going to talk about Hitler and Stalin and everything you're learning to have you ever thought of.
Using the medium of just speaking into a microphone but without the video.
I'm curious about this because like I fell in love with podcasts originally before there was ever this whole video component to it
and I realized there's something so Primal and magical about having someone's voice in your ear
my favorite kinds of interviews still very few people do it this way nowadays but my favorite kind Darwin.
You're just talking into the microphone so it's not over Zoom.
It's not in person it's just you in the microphone and the other person in the microphone and they're in your ear it's like the ultimate in intimacy.
Oh you mean from the interviewer perspective this yeah ever yeah but I but it would be interesting also is with the kind of thing you're talking about of just speaking
like just you in the mic I would love to be in person but you can't see the person I wonder what that's like good family mean like they're all there but behind a curtain ourselves your eyes closed,
talking you have your eyes closed or whatever you have because I think you still have get the same kind of chemistry because it's not just the visual that I don't even know that because obviously I have trouble making I got that
but as I don't know if the visual stimulation is the necessary thing there's something about the way audio travels that captures the intimacy,
were some people actually have headphones on like Joe does this have headphones on that's really intimate.
Like there's something about that sound going directly into your ear yeah yeah there is something Primal there yeah for sure I've.
I've thought about it definitely is some of my favorite podcasts are like that WTF with Marc Maron
that's Audio Only this does a few Audio Only podcast that I just love and what is that I've I still go on clubhouse that that was a,
let's social media platform rates Audio Only and so interesting that people,
the interesting thing about Clubhouse in particular people from all walks of life can tune in and they just
yeah I have it's a somebody needs to do some research in terms of introversion on that one because I don't feel any of my introvert
um
Like triggers happening because nobody can see is just audio and nobody is offended if you're just sitting there,
quietly just listening so you can you can participate whenever you want or not
yeah it's like the ultimate social Freedom yeah you can listen as much as you'd like you can participate if you want but you don't have to it's no big deal yeah nobody can like if I'm actually a physical party somebody's going to look at me right if you like why
you know they'll be that pressure to speak but you don't have to in that kind of audio setting and there's that intimacy like you can,
when it's Audio Only feels like you can reveal a lot more of yourself in some kind of.
Honest way I don't know what that is what is that a but I was I don't know but I assume it's tapping into something really ancient like we used to tell stories around the fire like our whole storytelling tradition was oral,
originally maybe that but we used visual stuff like
that's so you can actually see the person I seems like he seems like the visual elements so fundamental to the social interaction but there is,
something Primal about audio I wonder what that is in still that's why I mean most people listen to podcast I think Audio Only they have it in their ears while they're doing stuff yeah that's how I do it
and then there's that's how I judge and that's what that's where the friendship.
Like is formed it's weird that deep connection with other humans is formed because they're in your ear.
And you get to see them grow you get to see them be bored experience excitement and anger and fear and all those kinds of things it's fascinating it's fascinating.
The world of podcasting is fascinating because we're we're in this world of essentially radio.
Even though we all have all this high-definition content all this like Tick-Tock style fast stuff and still I know and we still choose to do this,
so we're at the end of the day I think that's really what people want most is.
To talk to each other and to know what people really think and podcasting of all the media that I've ever seen is the one where people come closest to telling you the truth.
The good and the bad and the bitter and the sweet and all of it but she long-form there's not enough time yeah exactly I had to explain this to people like you talk to CEOs and stuff they don't understand,
they understand they're starting to understand much better now I as a hard requirement.
With axios and stuff is that has to be three hours I say like this WOW because there's something they can't
beam doing marketing stuff for three hours the break I start being human to start relaxing and if they can't that also tells the kind of story but I do that kind of torture for CEOs only anyway yeah when I was there.
Getting my Publishing House did media training with me before a Bittersweet came out and.
And they were preparing me for like the five to seven-minute interview that you might have you know if you go on some quick TV thing or something like that and God I hate that it's like it feels like there.
You're basically having to not tell the full truth somehow because you can't you can't tell it in such a short amount of time well the other thing it's me podcasting was just the best thing that's ever happened the other downside of the 7 Minute interview.
Is I think you could do a really good job with that but the the dance partner has to be very good
it's actually challenging for everybody involved it's much harder for everybody involved hmm because you if you can do you know I can imagine like a Christopher Hitchens type character who's just super witty.
Did then that you could do a seven-minute thing you can get to the core a Bittersweet you can get to the core of the book without asking those generic Small Talk questions because too many people in that short form interview.
I just asking very generic questions they're doing small talk for so yes yes I all right you only get seven minutes you only get one interesting question go ask the weirdest the the deepest question that.
That also energizes the other person it's an art form that people don't take seriously I think the 7-minute thing five minute or even less,
and then the commercials which I
yeah and I've noticed that many of these roulette with best podcasters or ones where when you're on my side of the table you feel like it's more of a conversation and less like an interview or you're answering all the same questions you've asked you've answered a million times before it's really interesting how different
experiences and you're right though I do audio thing.
If you can lose yourself in that the intimacy of that and you don't even remember what stupid stuff you said it's people I've seen that I mean people don't give them enough credit as,
even in you might not be aware might not be a fan but Joe Rogan is a incredible conversationalist and that he makes you forget.
That anything is being recorded the year talking at all makes you forget time and you just enjoy yourself and that's whatever that is.
And that plugs then you plug into that Primal connection to other humans
what's your favorite Leonard Cohen song famous blue raincoat do you know that one,
maybe I'll play it yeah for people who don't know what word Cohen and this is your first introduction to him it's going to sound so gloomy.
It's so good he's got this deep rich voice,
Tori Amos covering famous blue raincoat yeah no we want what the original just like Hallelujah Jeff Buckley covered Leonard Cohen that was a really good one that was a really good one yeah and I also really like Rufus Wainwright it's cover
but famous blue raincoat for people who don't know it it's basically about a love triangle and it's told from the perspective.
Have a man whose wife has just been with another guy who is also his friend.
And he's writing a letter to that other guy and he's reflecting on the way that other relationships have changed in in the wake of this.
With the Vance and they're still friends so they're still well he refers to him as my brother my killer.
Which is such a Leonard Cohen thing to do because it's always like you know it's light and it's dark all at once.
Nothing is ever all one thing.
Music.
And the fact that it's four in the morning and at the end of December like those are transitional moment you know it's not going in today.
And it's just a going into the new year the it's not an accident.
There's something about December this whatever this certain scenes you can paint in your mind.
There's a there's a poem by Charles Bukowski called Nirvana,
it's a young man traveling to the middle of nowhere in the snow there's something about the snow isn't the rain or the snow can put you in a certain kind of mood that just,
what is it James Joyce the Dead the snow is falling and Dublin.
Put you in a place I mean David yadin who's
he's a researcher and psychedelics and Consciousness at Johns Hopkins he's a great guy and he's done research that has found that when people are
in their transitional moments of life you know and it could be a career change it could be a divorce it could be.
They're nearing the end of their life that they very often will say those are their most meaningful moments and their most spiritual moments and so I feel like that's what,
letter code knows how to tap into instinctively the year after he died his son Adam Cohen
made a memorial concert for him where all these famous musicians came to Montreal where they had lived and performed his music
and my husband who's not a Leonard Cohen fan and he's not a Bittersweet type at all but he knows how I feel about him is like you know you should really go to that concert and I felt so,
ridiculous the whole family went all the way to Montreal I demand a on a Monday and Monday it was just like a random Monday and we got in the plane looks like everyone's out of school
just so I can go go to this concert and.
And I got there and at the beginning I was feeling like this was all a terrible mistake because it's all these other musicians
playing this music and I don't actually really want to hear them like I'd rather listen to him on YouTube yeah and then.
And then a musician named Damien Rice came and played famous blue raincoat and he sang it and he,
did the most amazing thing at the end the whole thing was amazing but then at the end he sang this musical riff that was like.
All I could say is it was like a musical lamentation of the ages and the whole audience
just Rose silently to its feet and it was one of the greatest moments then I've ever had there's sometimes certain artists in a cover can capture,
is some kind of deeper way like carrying the thread of the power of the song So been listening a lot to Johnny Cash Hurt
is a Nine Inch Nails Trent Reznor so you talked about it and your podcast with Rick Rubin yeah was when I reached out to you because I like I love that
interview and I love that song also yeah yeah yeah so there's that there's the Kennedy Center Honors where they they celebrate a certain artist that did that for Led Zeppelin and I forgot her name is but the lead singer of Heart
perform Stairway to Heaven and it's like if you like alright you take,
one of the great sort of rock songs of all time what do you do in front of the oh the cool thing is,
you get to perform this in front of the artist while they're still there you know they're still alive so you get to watch you sort of perform and in that case the president President Obama is there and she's just knocked it out of the park but at the same time without.
I'll doing.
The original some hi you're just making it your own you making your own right it's not but not overlapping it really nothing partying from this the spirit of the original it's tough because the original Hallelujah by Leonard Cohen.
It's just not it's it's so powerful but it's just not as good as some of these covers well I think.
I think it's the words in the melody and then the covers take it to a different place the thing that Leonard Cohen seems to do well he I don't think he did it on,
Hallelujah because he was almost being playful on all of it like I don't know,
as opposed to that deep Melancholy like painful longing thing that Jeff Buckley did and others do too I wonder if it's because in a way he.
Hey that he over edited it but he apparently worked on that song for years and well if you gazillions of versus and checked most of them out so I wonder if we're hearing his version after.
He's like a little tired with that process yeah well that's the thing is like
maybe for my book tour you know is like you get tired of saying the same thing over and over and over and over you forget if you get the I forgot like the initial look the heart of it,
Yeah but I,
actually I got a chance to hang out with Dan Reynolds who's the lead singer of Imagine Dragons this is,
incredible band Super Pop yeah the most-played ban on like Spotify or something that's right it's not really huge Imagine Dragons face so we were listening to their music a lot,
it is so surreal to be hanging out with them and he's such a daughter such a like
very few people I met in my life are just as good of a human being and that has to do with the fact that he's struggling struggles he still I think struggles but he struggled for a long time with depression and so out of that pain
you see born this is really good human being this really good relationship with his wife like that.
When times are good they Lea and each other for like they did their deeply grateful for those precious moments so it's beautiful to watch but the he said that.
It's really important to feel the song every time.
Otherwise people know people are really good at detecting your bullshit you can't fake it,
yeah you really have to feel it every time you have to feel the emotion of It Whatever the emotion is of the original time you wrote it yeah it's just interesting because it.
I thought you could maybe fake it.
But he says he believes person is because he played in front of the gigantic crowds and over and over and over and over and over it's like no every time you have to have to be there there's got to be times when he's about to go out
and he's not feeling it and he has to figure out some way of getting himself into that her space that's what he's saying you have to otherwise you're just,
that's the job right don't take the job then.
And he loves it he says the biggest struggle in fact is the come down from that which is like.
You have this such a beautiful experience of connected with this large number of people sharing a song that you love and then it's such a rush of connection and then you have to.
You know when you get off stage you're now back to normal life and that's why a lot of musicians get into heavy drugs and all that kind of stuff because you're looking for that Rush again this very tough to the then go into this speaking of introvert because he probably is an introvert as
is like,
you have to find that calmness and how do you find the calmness when you were just playing in front of tens of thousands of people a hundred thousand whatever that number is
that Rush of connect and everybody is love in the air
and you still have to find that like inner peace and calm that's interesting because I so I don't know if this is the introvert in me talking and the writer in me talking but.
I don't know like I love most the moments where let's say I'll get a letter from a reader who will tell me what something I wrote meant to them.
And they'll talk about having had that kind of moment of you know the communion between the writer and the reader and obviously I wasn't there physically when it happened so I wasn't getting that kind of Rush that a musician would get in a concert.
Just the knowledge of that having happened out there in the world due to something that I added to it.
Yeah it's the most amazing love it but see imagine yeah imagine reading like thousands of those letters and then it's such a strong rush and everything else doesn't,
it could be overwhelming I guess this is but like anything else you have to come down and find a calm place like for example the danger.
People getting letters like that you start taking yourself too seriously you think like you are a special person somehow but,
that's you really want to avoid that feeling too yeah I don't actually experience it as that much different from when I'm on the other side of it like if I'm the reader and,
some other writer has made me feel that way to me it's the same thing yeah me too yeah it's a it's a cool it's a virtual hug I think it's like I was just listening to something about.
The different Russian writers.
I was mentioning him to you this academic his name is Gary saw Morrison and he studies Russian literature and he was talking about.
Don't know if I'll be able to get this right but basically that the people misunderstand a work like Anna Karenina and that we think of it as.
Telling us that you're supposed to live you're supposed to have like.
Grand tempestuous romances that might end in death or just bear whatever it is but you know you should be in it for the intensity of the emotion and he's saying actually that's not.
But exactly not what Tolstoy was saying that
actually it was the opposite that he was really making he was really advocating for everyday life he was saying it scenes from everyday like he was juxtaposing Anna Karenina with all these other couples who were just living happily and quietly day by day.
And that was what he believed was the ideal so as opposed to the ground rush and as opposed to the,
intensity owner if he is there a depth to the is there a romance that just the day-to-day
this is the romance to the day-to-day and don't get lately don't get distracted by the dopamine roller coaster ride of the grant romantic Notions yeah and it enjoy it while it's happening because those are life experiences also but
not to mistake those for being everything where is he from.
He's a professor at Northwestern and Northwestern and apparently his lectures are like the most popular on campus well.
People love them Gary saw Morrison is an American literary critic a slob pissed he's particularly known for scholarly work on the great Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy and fyodor Dostoevsky
Morrison is Lawrence T professor in arts and humanities at Northwestern University.
Wow and there's a lot of incredible work and then I'm sure looking through the lens of Russian literature and the romance of all of that he's looking at modern at the modern world yeah I think you should have him on your podcast and quiet flows the vodka or when Pushkin.
Comes to shove,
the curmudgeons guide to Russian literature and culture this is a quote one of the silly books he has on the list okay cool what are you saying I'm sorry oh no I was just saying yeah.
I find that when I take
photos on my phone I hardly ever take photos at the moment you're supposed to like everybody's gathered for some event I'll forget to take the photo but I take a lot of like scenes from everyday life because that's what I actually want to remember in the end.
Yeah yeah I'm the same the same it's actually concerning.
Because it's bad for productivity because I love everyday life so much then why why do any ambitious big thing your productivity is pretty good I don't know that you have to worry about it and I do so I want to launch a business.
You know I have a dream outside this is like a fun side thing.
You know I want to there's been a lifelong passion anyway that's a like building I like building stuff and I haven't been doing that as much as I would like that's.
Because largely because I like sitting in silence and enjoying the beauty that is just nature and life and when there's people there's people I love people I love everything and so when you love everything.
Why go through hell to build a company.
Yeah it's a valid question I mean I think you have to really good reason for wanting to do it but then your heart calls you for the certain sometimes you look out into the mountains and you say,
for some reason I long to go there even if it means leaving the tribe and putting yourself in danger and doing stupid shit that's the human imperative for exploration
yeah absolutely like when we were talking about.
You know this idea of longing being like the source code of humanity I think that's also the source code of our creativity.
It's the same longing for Eden it's like you're always reaching for something,
that you want to get to or that you want to build yeah it's the best of us what do you think.
You read about creativity and sadness.
You practically speaking how should we leverage sadness for creativity this is that
sort of in the artist domain in the writer's domain in the engineering domains and so on it's
definitely in those domains but it's in all domains you know we're all going to face pain in this life at some point and we all have the ability to.
Whether it was dance with standard and.
Live with it for a bit and then try to transform it into something that we find beautiful you know and it's very easy to.
Didn't notice the Grandeur of like the you know the painting hanging on the gallery wall or the new company that's just been created but it takes a thousand different forms right you know you could bake a cake or like.
In the wake of the pandemic we've had more people applying to medical school and nursing school and after 9/11 you had people applying for jobs as firefighters and teachers so there's something in the human spirit that.
Takes pain and turns it into meaning when we're at our best and when we're not at our best we.
Deny the pain and then take it out on ourselves and on other people so there's a kind of fork in the road what to do with it.
But we know I mean there's all these studies that I go through in the book like there is one where.
The researchers had people watch different movies like happy movies sad movies Bittersweet movies and they found when people watch Father of the Bride just like the ultimate Bittersweet you know you're walking
your daughter down the aisle kind of feeling that was.
They would give them creativity tasks after watching these different movies and the people who had been primed for bittersweetness were the most creative,
they were like primed to remember finality you know like love and finality basically love and impermanence there's something about that that's.
That gets us to our most beautiful state
I wonder if it is I mean there's studies like that there's a if you looked into the terror management Theory yeah that's really interesting stuff so they especially intensely
have you focused on that just sad but traumatic like death Prime you would death and see how that changes your mind
the Hut like both like,
I don't I don't know if this creativity studies but they have interesting I think a little bit tainted by
political bias but maybe not mean psychology is a complicated field but they study like Cory likely to vote for right
if you're primed by existential like by thinking about the fear of mortality feel mortality I forget what the conclusions are but I think they find that people become more tribalistic yeah you know like there is one study where they found that after they primed people that way that,
that they would get then give them the chance to put.
Hot sauce and meal that their political opponents were going to be eating and they put way too much hot sauce after they've been primed to worry about death I think at the core we're simple creatures so I actually like
in the book I spent a bunch of time with people who are working on radical life extension you know the quest to live forever
and people ask them a lot questions like you know the kinds of questions you were talking about earlier well like how are you going to feed everybody and how is there going to be space for everybody if everyone really could live forever,
and what about conflict when we haven't intensified conflict and their answer to that is.
They point to Terror management Theory you know and they say.
Because it's the fear of death they're basically saying it's the fear of death that are causing our conflicts in the first place and that if we remove the fear of death we'd have less conflict to contend with and that I don't really buy that,
it's possible that that's true but are you also how does the expression go throwing out the baby with the bathwater I are you also going to remove basically any source of meaning and
happiness in The Human Condition.
It's very possible that death is fundamental to The Human Condition the fun finality yeah that's the great philosophical question and I went to a conference of people who are working on this and I thought,
that they were going to be talking about those questions all through the conference but the mo is much more like.
We're so happy that we're here with people who have gotten past all those quibbles yeah you know we just know there's going to be meeting no matter what the basic assumption is,
let's try to extend life indefinitely and then we'll figure out if that's a good decision or more like we're sure it's a good decision or earlier at least makes that was what I felt
it's it's it's either with that they sure it's either we're sure.
It's a good decision or we're sure that is good to believe that it's a good decision meaning like there's no downside to
to that even if we find out it's wrong but yes there's a kind of certainty obviously you want to extend human life that's the kind of assumption that always seemed.
Now it could be true.
But just like the people who over focus on colonizing other planets.
It feels like you neglect the beauty.
And the the struggle of our life here on Earth I've sort of the same kind of criticism whether it's thinking about Valhalla or any other afterlife is you have if you're not careful.
Forget to make this life a great one
whatever happens afterwards so yeah definitely but from the engineering from a biology from a chemistry perspective is very interesting to think how do we extend this thing because it does seem that nature
the way designed living organisms.
It really wants us to die because that's part of the selection mechanism that's part of this seems to be fundamental to Evolution it.
The kiss,
people young then use protection was the one third young brain they get to explore a lot of get to figure out the world that come up their own novel ideas how to adapt a how to respond to that world
and then as you get older and older they get like stubborn and stuck in their ways and so we need them to die so we make room for new
life that's able to adapt to the changing environment if the old doesn't die.
Then you're not going to get stale and not be adaptable to the changing environment,
maybe it doesn't have to happen soon yeah maybe he doesn't think pressing listen I'm a big fan of pressing snooze and the alarm clock and the same way I do I'm one of the people that believe it's.
Or I don't definitely believe course I don't know but I think death is a.
Is a fundamental part of life but yeah if I'm on my deathbed I would sure as hell Press News as many times as possible yeah I know this interesting because I,
in some ways I really I share your instinct there is one scientist who I spoke to it that conference he's one of the leading Advocates and he said,
you know that's a story that we've invented for ourselves because we have no choice and if you really believe that you have no choice then your.
Then it's adaptive to tell that story that death gives meaning to life good point but if you really think you don't if you really think you could triumph over it,
would you still be telling that same story,
and I've been thinking about that question ever since
yeah ya know they got a good point they got a good point no matter what as an engineering and the scientific Pursuits it's a beautiful one
in your personal life if we can go there sure what's up been some Dark Places you've got in your own mind
grief loss
sad moments moments of sadness.
That have made you a better writer.
Better Creator a better human being well
I mean I've been through a lot of bereavement just in these last couple of years with covid but.
Even before that.
I mean there's there's all kinds of stuff I write about in the book and in some ways I feel like I can write about things those kinds of things better than I can speak them but I had a really complicated relationship with my mother growing up where.
We had a kind of Garden of Eden during my childhood like we were intensely intensely close and and my mother because of.
Some vulnerabilities that she had reacted.
With a lot of trouble to my adolescence and to Growing independent from her and starting to have different religious views and different political views and all kinds of things and.
And we had a pretty intense break that I described in the book and and it was so intense that even though after that we.
Still would get together for holidays and talk to each other on the phone and all that there was a sense in which like it was over at that point the relationship was Over the Garden of Eden was no more yeah yeah it was like a feeling of like.
Yeah like I know what Eden was like and and it's not there anymore.
And I think it was all the more confusing because like if you lose someone to actual bereavement.
You go through a mourning process and people have thought for thousands of years about how to do that but with something like this,
there's no process because you're not even admitting to yourself especially when you're like in your teens and 20s that your morning something so.
But but it was the case that for decades for decades I could not
answer even the simplest question about my mother like where did she grow up without tears in my eyes or more than tears in my eyes like embarrassing embarrassing tears so I would just try to steer the subject in another place
but I will say you know two things happened when is that I've spent
the last 67 years writing this book about joy and sorrow and loss and love and all of it.
And I've really come to terms with all of it and then the second thing that happened is my mother now has Alzheimer's and.
In her Alzheimer's.
She still actually the same person like she's forgotten most things but she still has these conversational lanes that you can travel down that are like the way she always was and.
The way that she was when I was a kid which was like so incredibly loving and so connected and so warm and sweet and funny and all of it all the things I remembered.
Like it's all come back and for all these decades.
I had been wondering whether that Garden of Eden I remembered had actually happened or whether you know that was just like the fantasy of a child and you know maybe it was always difficult and I had not seen it but.
I'm seeing her now and I realized that it was all true everything I remember it was all true it all happened because it's happening again.
And you return to the Garden of Eden for time yeah and to Childhood it's always a question of whether you can return to that place.
Well I don't know I don't even know if I'd say I've returned because I'm a different person now and I don't,
are you need her and you sure are you sure you're still a different than the
the then the ten-year-old well okay feel different no I mean I'm the same person in terms of my need for love and love of love and all of that but
I don't look.
I'm not dependent on my mother for it the way I was then and that makes the experience really different yeah they're younger she's a she's a god figure what is that that the roots the parents.
Such a funny civilization will live and there's a depth of connection to parents that's.
That's probably more powerful than anything else in terms of its formative effect on who you are I think it's the most powerful and in fact.
When this started happening I got to college and I took a class in creative writing and I tried to write a story a fictional story a fictionalized version of what was happening and I called it the most passionate love.
Because of what you just said yeah and the teacher actually said to me she's like you should put this story in a drawer and not take it out again for 30 years because you're way too close to it yeah so I've now finally written it 30 years later.
Yeah you probably still too close to it though I don't know though I mean.
I do think like,
I think everybody goes through experiences in this life where you're experiencing like a fundamental pain of separation and desire for a union and it takes so many different forms,
and this was my Primal form of it but you know for someone else it's a betrayal or a bereavement or an exile from a country of their birth or whatever it is,
but then you get to solve that puzzle for for the for the rest of your life yeah active like I really do believe that you know that the original love that.
We long for like that one of the great things that you learn as you grow older is that though.
That the love exists in some plane that's more General than the particularized form in which you first knew it yeah I mean that's why despite all the creepy interpretations with.
But even though Sigmund Freud is probably wrong in the details he was the first one to sort of suggest that
our experiences give me he said that,
that was really controversial at the time when young people they start having sexual thoughts I could gauge to or something whatever the hell he said so you develop this kind of connection to do the opposite sex or whatever did your mother to your parents.
And I think a lot of that is shown to be probably not true what is,
like a deeper truth there's your first early experiences of Love or depth of connection and probably some how strongly formative of your conception of love and your definition.
Of the perfect thing you're reaching for for the rest of your life yeah I think that's right and you can really see it when you become a parent too.
You know you can just see things like there's those screwed up you know I have to say it like I mean knock on wood I actually feel like like we're doing pretty well like my kids are teenagers now and.
I really had thought that I wasn't going to repeat the issues that I had been through with my mom and I can say I really am not.
Yeah like my mom for various reasons just had a lot of trouble with my Independence and I just don't feel that at all.
So yeah they might there might be other things you're totally blind too,
I guess that's possible is that the way of parenting is you solve the problems of the past but there's that matter anyone he did ride find out and enter 20 years but like so far so good what was them
but parenting can you keep can you give from your own experience and from your writing.
Yeah well oh my God there's a lot to say so on the Bittersweet side of things the wisdom that I would give is.
That
especially for kids who are growing up in relative comfort with everything going pretty well,
they get the idea that.
Real life is when things are going well and when things don't go well it's like a detour from the main road as opposed to understanding that it's all the main road and I tell the story in the book of.
This time that we went on the family vacation where we rented a house in the countryside and.
The house was next to this field where we're lived two donkeys that our kids fell in love with they were like really little at the time two boys and.
They're spending all this time feeding carrots to the donkeys and it's all beautiful and then comes the day where they realize that we're leaving in like two days and they're never going to see these donkeys again and they start crying themselves to sleep and the usual things that.
Parents might say at a moment like that of like you know maybe we'll come back or another family will feed them will feed these donkeys none of that made any difference.
But when we said to them.
You know goodbye is part of life and this feeling you're having everybody has it you've had it before you're going to have it again you'll feel better in a couple days,
but this is the way it's supposed to be this is natural that's when they stopped crying because.
I think that's when they stopped resisting yeah like it's one thing to feel the pain of goodbye and it's another thing to be feeling like this isn't supposed to be happening.
If the resistance part of this isn't supposed to be happening that makes life really difficult yeah as I said you're more clear-eyed view of what it really is this isn't he supposed to be happening there's a show called Yellowstone as recently started watching
yeah I know I've heard of it we actually started watching it but only a few minutes and didn't get into it so there's just a quick it's not a spoiler of any kind but there's a father taking out the Sun for the first time to go hunting and
you know the shooter first buck and.
The sun is get really sad because he pulls the trigger and he took a life and the father says that.
Everybody gets killed in this life that's the way of nature that's the way each one of us is going to get killed and.
It's interesting because I didn't really think of it that way because you think you died but he really framed it as killed
hmm because he's like there's no such thing as dying of old age that's medically let's discuss that a bit but basically there's something whether it's.
A truck or a bacteria something is going.
Kill you in the end and that was an interesting way to look at it because we tend to think of humans aren't.
Are supposed to be killed we think of murder is one of the sins that have one of the things that you don't do in society but you know what,
we do that the more technical discussion whether we
ultimate get killed by something in the end but it to some degree that's true at least for most of us that there's something that gets is whether it's cancer those kinds of things it's interesting but yeah it's that reframing of this not it's supposed to be this is the way of the world yeah,
it's funny I mean you know at the same time that I just wrote a whole book about the fact that this is the way it is like I really do believe this is the way it is and
and with this reality there's an intense beauty that comes along with it.
So we have to accept the reality to get to the beauty I believe that and at the same time there's a part of me that's just like.
Yeah but give me the magic wand make the world different yeah.
Yeah yeah no I don't know how much of this is a female thing to like I was watching with my son and my 12 year old the other day we were watching this show about the Battle of Thermopylae and yeah and it was like all about you know
Valor and glory on the battlefield and and I said to him something like gosh don't you just wish we lived in a world where.
You didn't have to do all this in order for everyone
just to live their lives just looked at me completely puzzled like no you know like to him it all just seemed self-evident that the world would be structured that way
and he had like the twelve-year-old like admiration for the dollar of it all but you wonder if that's if that's.
Nature or nurture
I wonder what that world looks like.
We do live in a world where murder scene as bad but you look at a lot of the human history I don't know if they had the same kind of conception of that in terms of the you have to ask
what kind of murder you know for what purpose you know war was a way of life.
It's interesting it's interesting if we can imagine properly a future that is.
Different than ours in terms of operating under the different moral systems I'd like saying with living indefinitely Or living in a society with no war.
Like how fundamental is war.
How fundamentals death I mean I think it's so fundamental to our source code I just wish that our source code were different basically like I can't get people already have that wish there's there's brain computer interfaces that try to merge.
So greater and greater with smartphones were already kind of cyborgs but greater and greater merger of computational power so literally,
adding source code to our original source code just a different there's the mushy biology that runs source code and then there's more cold electrical
systems and then they integrate together and potentially.
One day we offload
the magic that is human consciousness
also into the machine and then we'll get to see maybe maybe they'll be a little bit less asshole issue about the whole War thing that be more but there is I think even when I engine when I think about engineering.
Human intelligence are superhuman intelligence systems I feel like they also need to have the yin yang of life.
They have to be able to be afraid and to be sad and all those kinds of things but maybe it's because I'm.
A product in this particular environment maybe sadness is a human useful human invention but not a universal one,
this is what I don't know because this is where I come back to the as I told you like the original reason that I wrote my whole book was the feeling that somehow in the expression of sad music.
Is what other people see when they talk about God like there's something so there's like an ultimate Beauty there.
Yeah but I don't know if we have access to without that but maybe we do.
But I can't say in this world it's a great way to get access to that state is it within the reach of science to deeply understand this you think.
To understand that why he feel sad when you listen to a song for why you feel loved when you're listening to a sad sound to us as all right yeah.
Why the sad why the sad song opens up some kind of deep connection to something you can call Divine or something whatever the heck that is yeah
I do think I mean we have like really early signs of it from the research and I'm sure we're just at the yeah scratching the surface stage but I mean like we know for example that you know the vagus nerve which,
it's so fundamental that governs our breathing and digestion.
Are vagus nerve also activates when we see another being in distress there's like a,
instinctive impulse to want to make it stop,
and the theory is that that's an evolutionary design because we had to be able to respond to the cries of our infants you know and from that ability grows the greater ability to respond to other people's cries too so.
That's probably just you know
like the very first step in being able to understand what all that is,
we've already given plenty of advice but broadly what advice would you give to Young Folks,
today about career about life whether they want to be writers lawyers scientists musicians and artists whatever the heck they want to be how can they live a life that can be proud of
okay here's what I think.
He's an absolutely do that thing that you're dying to do.
But you should always have a plan B and it like a back-up plan and a way of earning a living no matter what happens because funny I feel like people,
we have this narrative in our culture of like that the Glamorous thing is to figure out the thing you love and then Risk Everything to achieve that but,
first of all a lot of people aren't comfortable with that level of risk and second when you're living with that level of risk.
That's a cognitive load too and so you don't have the full emotion and heart to be able to focus on the thing that you actually really love because your.
Stressed out about it so I'd say like can't the back-up plan in place and then do the thing.
My advice would be the opposite huh okay I'm I'm leaving like the Romantic well I think the best the the truth is be.
Aware the cost.
Not having a plan B has to do it deliberately if you don't but I you know I would be cows can find what you love and let it kill you I think.
Now you have to actually know your personality I know if I have a plan B.
I will not try as hard on plan a and I would likely take Plan B.
Because if plan is is the risky thing hmm I just work way much better one in the state of desperation,
so with my back against the wall and you have to know that about yourself I think that has to do I think we can refine it to say you actually have to really know yourself and how you respond to different kinds of risk,
like I would not do well in that kind of situation I'd be like up at two in the morning
worrying about it yeah we're as if I have something like it doesn't have to be paying the rent in some Grand way but if there's some basic way of paying the rent
then my heart's create do the thing I really love that's hilarious I for me the only way I'm free is.
When I don't know how I'm going to be the right huh yeah cuz that's because otherwise I'll,
find a way to pay the rent that's not at all
a source of deep fulfillment for me so I stay so it's like if you don't have like the what's the expression I don't know something like the dog at your back yeah
deadline and you won't actually do it I agree real or artificial deadlines anxiety and so on so yeah you have to if yeah so the advice is know your triggers but yeah but we're still saying that the same basic thing of like,
do the thing you really love it.
Fed Up the strategy as the rest of your life early to your personality exactly exactly what do you think is the meaning of life.
The meaning of this whole thing probably has something to do with.
Whatever we feel when we listen to us that song yeah.
Because two things come simultaneously to my mind when you ask that question I've been asking it since I was four I remember the first time I did the question is more important than the answer probably yeah keep asking.
I don't know the first one is Beauty and I don't know why Beauty so important but I just know that it is impossible to Define perhaps.
Is it definable yeah
other than you know it when you see it I don't know I mean just.
Has to do with that line you feel something when you just see it or hear it yeah you just see it and it's like like some it's.
Whatever can delivery to that mode of transcendence where you're no longer purely in your own self and.
You're in something higher and when you're in those states of mind.
You know it because you have the temporary Sensation that.
That you could die at that moment that the people you love could die and it will all be okay because there's something else.
So that's my first answer and then the second answer is
the need to relieve psychic pain I was like other people psychic pain I don't know why that's just that's just like an Impulse that I have psychic pain is more like like suffering of any form.
Yeah but I mean
what is there a particular yeah just making the world.
Better and less pain,
let's paint to go around in general as you're just sort of optimistic desire and longing for a world without sort of Destruction without malevolent destruction,
yeah we're all very aware that wouldn't be necessary yeah exactly exactly but yeah like I so I had this moment.
It wasn't so long ago I was doing some interview and somebody asked me like what are you longing for right now and.
My answer that moment was like you know what I'm actually at this moment in life where I'm not longing for anything I'm at this particular Way Station where everything.
Is the way I want it to be and.
Of course the minute you say something like that you know you're going to be proven wrong because like an hour later I get a letter from.
A reader who have been in touch with over the years and he was telling me about like a state as I kick struggle that he's going through and.
I just thought oh my gosh if there anything I could do to make it that,
his life wouldn't have been such that he would be in this position in the first place like his struggles had to do with a long life history.
So I don't know why I feel that it's funny but I do those moments when you were just at peace there's nothing else you want feel like that's like a temporary Repose like it was exactly
you could you bet your ass.
A desire follows that at some point but you get to enjoy those little moments yeah I took me when I say that even when he asked me and I answered that way I said this is a Way Station like I knew it was temporary
but I didn't realize it would be disrupted like an hour later and said of to give you push back.
To your to your statement about the possibility of creating because she a beauty.
And basically alleviating suffering is a quarterly like from Hunter and styles to the pushes back against that which is for every moment of Triumph for every instance of beauty many Souls must be trampled.
But that's a very Hunter as Thompson
you know how yeah yeah yeah it's not the greatest philosopher all of all times but he certainly beautiful a chaotic human being
well that's true and I will tell you that my nickname for my husband is gonzo kind of because of him you know he invented that form of Gonzo journalism where like the.
The writer is totally in the story and my husband's like that's his personality he's in everything that he does he's really in it he's really,
he just lived that way so well then there was name is Ken but I call him Gonzo like 90% of the time
well then it's a beautiful way to end the season this is thank you for your work thank you for being who you are thanking you for initially at least making me
feel okay about being an introvert and educating and making the rest of us feel great about being introverts it's like half the world or whatever the heck it is it's a lot of people
thank you for being you thank you for talking to Dale this is awesome this is fun thank you so much it was so great to talk to you and I think it was the.
What I said to you when we first got connected is thank you for your way of being in the world I really really love it thanks for listening to this conversation with Susan Cain.
Support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some words from Susan Cain herself.
The highly sensitive introvert tends to be philosophical or spiritual and their orientation rather than materialistic or hedonistic they dislike small talk.
They often describe themselves as creative or intuitive they dream vividly and can often recall their dreams the next day.
They love music nature art and physical Beauty.
If you'll accept really strong emotions sometimes acute bouts of Joy but also sorrow Melancholy and fear.
Highly sensitive people also process information about their environments both physical and emotional unusually deeply.
They tend to notice so these that others miss another person's shifted mood or a light bulb burning a Touch Too brightly.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
Music.